In this section we'll talk about shortcodes. And in case you have no prior WordPress experience,
let's first discuss what shortcodes are.
And then we will take a look at how to create shortcodes.
So of course always make sure you have your MAMP server open and your npm running. And then I'm gonna
go to the wp-admin and Pages. And I'm gonna edit any page. So let's edit this Sample Page. And during this section I'm
gonna be using the classic editor. I'm not gonna be using the Gutenberg editor. And that's because shortcodes
in Gutenberg are not gonna be used as often as they were used before in the classic editor. But they
can still be used.
And I think it's still important to learn how to create them.
So let's edit this page. So shortcodes are away when you are creating a post in the editor to render some HTML components.
Or maybe to interact with the database maybe get the latest post or something like that without actually
writing
HTML or PHP.
So for example if we add a gallery here, a default gallery, WordPress gallery.
So let's choose a couple of images.
And then if you go to text, you'll find that wordPress uses this string here.
And if you update and then view the page,
the string will be converted to the HTML for the gallery.
So this string here is this ashortcode.
And when WordPress is parsing your page content, it finds a string written in this syntax and then it
triggers a certain function that will output some HTML.
So in this case this function will loop through these IDs for the images and then output them like
so.
So WordPress actually uses shortcodes in the classic editor. In Gutenberg.
things are different but let's learn how to write our own shortcodes now.
So let's say,let's remove this.
Let's say we would like to create a shortcode
that is called,
and by the way shortcodes are also, should also be prefixed.
So let's write a shortcode which should be a button. And shortcodes as you saw for the gallery can have attributes.
So let's say we want the color and the text for the button.
And then close it.
So right now we'll refresh our page.
This will not do anything really.
And that's because we have not defined the shortcode. So let's see how to define shortcode and attach a function to
it that will run once WordPress finds this string in your content.
So let's go to our text editor. And let's open functions.php and let's write this code here now. And then we will
see if we'll have to create a separate folder for it. So our shortcode we decided it will be called
"_themename_button".
So to define the shortcode we're gonna call a function called add_shortcode(). And this function will take
the shortcode name and the function that will run once
a shortcode is found in your content. So let's call it the same name.
"_themename_button". And then let's define this function. And this function will receive the attributes and
the attributes are the things that we paste here.
Right?
So let's actually var_dump() and just make sure what the attributes will look like.
And we have an array with "color" and "text". So great.
So the first thing you have to do when you create a shortcode is to define some default attributes
for your shortcode. So to do that let's call a function called shortcode_ atts(). And the first argument
will be an array of default attributes.
And the second argument will be the attributes that the user passed for this shortcode which are in our
case
these ones. So let's define the defaults.
So we have the "color". And let's say the color is, I don't know, "red". And the "text" and let's default it to "Button".
So this function will return another array.
So let's see. Let's var_dump() what will be returned from this function
And as you can see it returns the color and the string that are here.
But let's say the user did not provide this attribute for example, the color. And let's refresh here.
And as you can see the shortcode_atts() function will return the color as the default color and
the text as the text that was passed here.
So the shortcode_atts() function we'll just see what the user provided and what are the defaults
and then produce an array that will be the product of both.
Also one thing that is common when writing shortcodes is to use the extract() function for the shortcode_atts()
function. And the extract() function will just convert the array into normal PHP variables.
So for example now here anywhere we can use color and we can use text instead of, you know, saving the
shortcode attributes an array and then accessing the color in this array,
like so. Right?
So
short code functions should always return a value.
You can not for example just echo some HTML here. You must return an HTML string.
So let's do that, let's return.
But before doing that
one important note also. Attributes should always be in lowercase.
You cannot use uppercase or camel case in the attribute names.
Right?
So let's return a button with a "style". And style will have "background-color" and then we will concatenate our
color.
And then the $text and then close the bottom tag.
Of course this is a simple shortcode.
You also might have a lot of attributes and stuff like that. But let's keep it simple for now.
So let's see now. And as you can see we now have a button with the background and the text.
We've done something wrong however. We did not escape the color and the text. Shortcode also requires
that you escape any variable that you used in your content.
So the color is an HTML attribute, so let's "esc_attr($color)".
And the $text is inside of an HTML tag.
So let's "esc_html($text)".
And now we have created our first shortcode.
Now let's create another one.
And I'm gonna create this other one for a certain reason that you will see in the next lecture.
Let's create
an icon shortcode.
And let's say the icon will receive one attribute the "icon" class name and this will be an icon class name
from Font Awesome that we've already loaded. And then it will load an I tag with the class
for this icon.
So class and then the $icon here.
And icons also get an "aria-hidden" attribute.
So remember when we use the
icon Font Awesome in the search form I think. We used these classes. So this was would be provided to the shortcode and
it will render the I tag. So let's try this.
Let's go
here
and
"_themename_icon".
And let's see now. And we have typo in esc_attr().
And I think we forgot to close the I tag properly, sorry.
So now we have a button and an icon. Let's see what we can do more
with shortcodes in the next lecture.